# Incident: 2024-12-04 20:44:30 UTC

## Summary

Between 20:44 UTC and 20:45 UTC on 4 December 2024, approximately 3 users (generated traffic) began to experience extreme latency of around 32 seconds when ordering pizzas from the JWT Pizza Factory. This latency spike was triggered by an automated chaos event scheduled to begin at around 20:44 UTC, which lasted approximately 14 minutes, until 20:58.

The event was detected by Grafana OnCall, which monitored for average pizza creation latencies longer than one second. The team responded to this event by reviewing logs in Grafana and locating the reportUrl in the pizza creation HTTP responses. Navigating to this URL automatically ended the chaos event. This event of mid-level criticality affected 100% of the users attemtping purchases at the time of its firing, but these users were simply traffic generated from a shell script. Thus, no real users were affected.

## Detection

This incident was detected when the Purchase Latency Alert was triggered and Ethan Wait, the on-call engineer, was paged by Grafana OnCall. After an initial alert via email was not responded to, Grafana OnCall sent a push notification one minute later through the mobile app, allowing the engineer to respond to the issue.

The engineer was alerted within two minutes of the chaos event, as OnCall had been performing latency wellness checks every 15 seconds. The frequency of these wellness checks certainly allowed the response time to be as effective as it was. The only available engineer had been in a class at the time of the first alert notification via email; this brings to our attention that additional on-call engineers may be a wise improvement to our issue response procedure, allowing multiple individuals to receive the initial alert.

## Impact

For 14 minutes between 20:44 UTC and 20:25 UTC on 4 December 2024, our users experienced extreme latency in pizza creation.

This incident affected 3 customers (100% of active service users), who experienced long wait times, up to 32 seconds, in ordering their pizzas through the JWT Pizza Factory. No support tickets or social media posts were submitted.

## Timeline

All times are UTC.

- _20:44:00_ - First known users begin to experience high pizza purchase latency
- _20:44:30_ - Grafana sets Purchase Latency alert to PENDING, noting the purchase latency was above its allowed threshhold of 1 second 
- _20:45:30_ - Grafana sets Purchase Latency alert to ALERTING
- _20:46:00_ - Alert group registered
- _20:46:00_ - Alert group assigned to route "default" with escalation chain "JWT Pizza"
- _20:46:01_ - Grafana OnCall triggers step "Notify on-call from Schedule JWT Pizza"
- _20:46:01_ - Email message sent to on-call engineer, Ethan Wait
- _20:46:30_ - Issue acknowledged by engineer
- _20:56:00_ - Engineer navigates to reportUrl, automatically triggering the end of the chaos event
- _20:58:00_ - First recorded instance of acceptable purchase latency (49 ms)
- _20:58:30_ - Grafana OnCall sets Purchase Latency alert to RESOLVED and closes issue

## Response

After receiving a page at 20:46 UTC, on-call Engineer Ethan Wait came online at 20:47 UTC in the Grafana dashboard to inspect the metrics and logs. At the time, he was in class and did not initally notice the first alert. After recognizing the high purchase latency was likely the result of an issue with the JWT Pizza Factory, he inspected the pizza creation responses in the logs.

## Root cause

The chaos injected into the system had been intentionally requested the night before in order to turn in Deliverable 11: Chaos Testing. An automated process, likely located within the JWT Pizza Factory itself, had increased the latency in pizza creation calls made from the JWT Pizza Service. As the deliverable has already been turned in and the chaos located, the issue is unlikely to present itself again in the future.

## Resolution

As he inspected the logs, the on-call engineer noticed a previously-unseen "reportUrl" attribute in the HTTP responses from users' purchase requests. Assuming that further information could be gained by navigating to this URL, the engineer did so. To his surprise, navigating to this URL returned a response of _{"msg":"Chaos resolved"}_. Shortly thereafter, users' pizza purchase latencies returned to being within normal bounds.

The elevated time to resolution, 14 minutes, was due to the engineer (of his own admittance) continuing to take notes in CS 340 for several minutes after acknowledging the issue and opening Grafana. This is unacceptable, and the employee has been terminated from his position at JWT Pizza. As he was the only on-call engineer JWT Pizza employed, he was subsequently re-hired, but told "hey man, don't do that again and stuff".

## Prevention

The root cause of this issue is unlikely to occur again in the future, as Deliverable 11: Chaos Testing has already been turned in and the chaos detected. Employees have been reminded not to click any big blue buttons that say "I'm ready for some chaos!", and will be put through mandatory "Don't Push the Big Blue Button" training.

## Action items

1. Deliverable 11: Chaos Testing has been turned in, eliminating the need for future requests for automated chaos
1. Employees will be required to attend mandatory "Don't Push the Big Blue Button" training by the start of 2025
1. Management will consider hiring additional on-call engineers (by Q1 2025) to allow for redundant monitoring in the future, thereby reducing initial response time
1. Company policy will be updated, expressly forbidding an on-call engineer from continuing to take CS 340 notes after receiving and acknowledging an alert from Grafana OnCall